# compareBSTtoArray
The goal of this assignment is to compare the Binary Search Tree with a traditional unsorted array data structure, both implemented in Java, using a real-world application to check if a student is on a pre-approved list for access to campus during the lockdown.

MY OO DESIGN:
The classes I created were AccessArrayApp, AccessBSTApp, Students, Experiment and a python script called testTrials. AccessArrayApp functioned independently of the other classes, whilst the Students class and BinarySearchTree classes were instantiated in AccessBSTApp. BinarySearchTree relied on the Student class to function as well as other classes that I did not make but were provided by Prof. Suleman to enable the handling of the binary search tree. AccessBSTApp instantiated a BinarySearchTree object that was used to call and implement methods “find” and “insert”. The Student class contained a compareTo method which I wrote so that the interface comparable could be used in the student class and the BinarySearchTree class. This method was needed when the inOrder function of the BinarySearchTree class was called as the compareTo method dictated how the binary search tree sorted itself. A toString method was also created in the Student class which was needed so that once the binary search tree found the node containing the student ID it was searching for, it could output a string instead of a memory location.
In addition, I created two integer instance variables in BinarySearchTree, one to count the number of operations used in the insert method and the other to count the number of operations in used in a find method (this being subject to the input- that is the Student ID- passed in as a parameter). The values of these variables were accessed in AccessBSTApp once a BinarySearchTree object was created.
The python script TestTrials was used to generate the data required to determine the best/worst/average cases for the BST and Array (it returned the number of find operations required for each student ID parameter in a subset of n. It ran from the bin directory, calling either AccessBSTApp or AccessArrayApp depending on whether the array or BST was being tested. Through importing the Python function os the java files AccessArrayApp and AccessBSTApp were able to be called and used from within the script. The method “find” was invoked through passing in student details that were read line by line from the text file imported.
The Experiment class does not interact with any other classes. It simply takes in the text files containing the data regarding the number of search operations as an argument in the command line and then returns the min, max and average of the numbers from the text file.

EXPERIMENTATION DESCRIPTION
The goal of the experiment was to prove that a binary search tree requires more comparison operations (and therefore takes a longer amount of time) to insert objects/variables than an array, however the binary search tree requires far less comparison operations (and therefore is far quicker) in finding something within the tree than an array is at finding something within the array.
The key to my implementation of the experiment was the creation of a python script and an Experiment class. However, before this, I created 10 text files that were subsets of the original oklist.txt. The text files were of n=500, n=1000, n=1500, n=2000, n=2500, n=3000, n=3500, n=4000, n=4500 and n=5000 data items. All data entries within each subset were unique.
My python script outputted the number of comparison operations required per parameter, that is the number of comparison operations required for searching each student ID within the text file imported. The script ran both AccessBSTApp and AccessArrayApp on the subset files explained above, the name of the java class being used needed to be changed manually and was not automated. Find and insert comparisons were counted separately. The output in the terminal was then saved to a file. The new text files contained the results for the different subsets, the array and BST results for the subset were saved to separate files. I created a class called Experiment that read from these text files that were created. The program looped through each text file comparing the comparison number result for each parameter in the subset to determine the minimum number of comparisons, the maximum number of comparisons and the average. The results were returned, and the numbers generated were used to plot the graph and create tables documented in this report.

TEXT FILES EXPLAINED:

oklist= data set used in AccessArrayApp and AccessBSTApp
n500= one example of an initial data set for testing
n500Array= one example of data set outputted: this set contained the number of comparrison opperations required for searching each student ID in an array
n500BST= one example of data set outputted: this set contained the number of comparrison opperations required for searching each student ID in a binary search tree
